---
layout: post
title: "BCM 215 - Devlog #1: From Car to Tank"
date: 2026-02-17
categories: "bcm215"
---

# Devlog 1: From Car to Tank

## What I Started With
To kick start the development, I begin with a functional 4-wheeled raycast car chassis that I built last semester, which was dated 2-3 months ago (December 2025). This chassis feature a manual gearbox system, engine values, and external constants like air resistance and tyre grip, which are the fundamentals needed for an engaging car simulator. For those who are curious, below is a short video demonstration of how this “raycast car chassis works”

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/3QGVhcNi2Ss" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## What to Achieve?
The goal of this session is straightforward: Strip away the car simulation, and rebuild the chassis as an arcade tank hull. For now, there will be no turrets and no decoration yet. To accurately describe what the finished product should look like, I'll call it “just a tank hull that even a kid can enjoy controlling.”

---
## The Process: What I Actually Did

### Step 1: Deleting Systems
**My intent:** This part is about turning a “simulator” into an “arcade”. Simulators generally have a lot of sophisticated controls to maximize technical authenticity, so the player can feel like a proud professional just by sitting before their computer. However, action-oriented players who chase “kills”, “coins”, and “XP” may find it cumbersome to learn about gear shifting and how to boot an engine, and that would make them lose engagement. Therefore, I'll deal with this problem here by making the vehicle easy to understand.

Due to difficulties to document specific steps I went though (different functions were closely intersected), to provide a simple and informative report, below is a log of scripts that were removed.
- BrakeModule.luau: Braking related math calculations (BrakingForce = Mass * Deceleration) drawn from Newton’s Second Law (F = ma). 
- EngineModule.luau: Engine specifications (e.g. Horsepower, gear ratio, and torque).
- TransmissionModule.luau: Player's input regarding shifting jargon (e.g. E for upshift, Q for downshift"), and the in-game definition of gears (e.g. Reverse, Neutral, 1, 2, 3, etc.)

### Step 2: Introducing Static Values
**My intent:** This part is about making an predictable and scalable system. With the complex elements removed, I now need to fill in values that dictate how exactly the vehicle should behave. The core idea is “the tank must do what I instruct it to do.” If designed perfectly, the player should be able to read the tank’s stats and immediately know how good or bad this tank is for their play style, without needing hours upon hours of research for fear that they accidentally waste in-game money.

The list below included some of the new entries added into the system:
- Top Speed: Number value, determine how fast the hull can move exactly (e.g. 30)
- Left & Right Track Force: Number value, representing how much force is applied to the left and right side of the hull. This can also be understood as acceleration speed. (This is informed by the next section)
- Weight: How heavy the vehicle is. This has nothing to do with the speed, but it influence the vehicle's suspension and stability

### Step 2A: Reworking Steering
**My intent:** This is one instance where I minimalize an already simple system to address user-friendliness.

During the previous step, I have identified a fundamental gap, where a car relies on its front axle (sometimes more than that) to steer, and the rest of the axles follows momentum. However, a tank’s entire movement is controlled by the two tank tracks. In theory, to move the tank ahead, equal force is given to the left and right track. To steer on the spot, one track is given positive force, the other is given negative force.

This sounds straightforward on paper, but I think most players dont have two levers in their gaming setup. Therefore, they must rely on traditional input (e.g. “WASD” on keyboard, on-screen joystick on mobile, physical joystick on controller) to manuever the tank, and I have to make this possible.
My solution is to add a new variable “Offset” under the existing “Left & Right Track Force” variable.

**Technical Demonstration**
- Assuming TrackForce = 10,000:
- When player make forward (linear) input, left and right track will be given a force (F) of +10,000. 
- For left (angular) input, left track is given -5,000 F, while right track is given +5,000 F, prompting the tank hull to rotate on the spot. 
- If both linear and angular input is made,  Offset will be used to calculate how less force is given to one track. If Offset is 0.6, that means left track gets a force 0.6x of the right track when player prompt a left turn while the tank is moving forward (L: 6,000 / R: 10,000).

---

## Current Result
I now have a test place containing this functional tank chassis. At this moment, the tank hull’s movement and handling is considered game-ready. The hull’s stats, such as speed, weight, and clunkiness, is easily modifiable. However, the turret is yet to be developed. Therefore, I believe the DA is considered half-completed, and is following the intended schedule.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/HlD6gLL8MJ8?si=KZsPU8Dy_KODbJra" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Unresolved Problem: Tank Tracks
In the previous car chassis, each wheel had one raycast (4 total), while the tank demo has 10 wheels. If I only raycast the wheels, the visual track may clip through the ground in uneven terrain. If I add raycast to the track, how many do I need before the game lags? This will not interfere with the core gameplay, but a feature enhancement worth considering.

---
## Time Spent

Time Spent: ~1 week

### ~15%: Foundational work
Note: This represent the portion used to design the fundamental logic, and the first iteration to generate large chunks of code

### ~50%: Debugging + Playtesting
Note: This part addresses game-breaking bugs and flawed logic. Excessive scripts were deleted in this portion, and Qwen’s (the artificial intelligence tool deployed) initial misinterpretations were addressed here

### ~35%: Casual play session & Experiential observation
Note: I spent another large portion of time to actually immerse and “feel” how the tank works after most game-breaking bugs were addressed. Some fine-tuning, and videos were recorded here.